Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to introduce the idea that the natural numbers
have an interesting kind of arithmetic structure
which is closely related to the algebra of
multisets in fact there's an important ingredient
for setting up that algebra in a coherent way so
there's a little bit of a novelty here today we're
going to be considering nat plus so the natural
numbers together with zero with three operations
addition the usual one together with union and
intersection so this is rather unfamiliar notation
applying these set theoretical operators to
actually ordinary natural numbers okay so what are
the definitions well M Union n is just the max of
M and n you have two natural numbers we will take
the bigger one and M intersect n is the minimum
of the M and then it's the smaller one so for
example 5 plus 3 Union 7 he is 5 plus well the max
of 3 + 7 is 7 so we get 12 and 6 intersect 4 plus
3 Union 1 is the minimum here is for the maximum
here is 3 so we get 7 and I'm going to refer to
this kind of new realm of arithmetic as a realm
so it's a kind of a new term that we're going to
gently introduce to refer to having a structure
where we have an addition in the Union and
intersection satisfying the kinds of properties
that we're about to now discuss all right so
properties of the natural numbers together with
these three operations first of all they're all
commutative it doesn't matter if you interchange
the order of the two elements the sum the Union
the intersection is double say each one of these 3
operations is collectively with itself associative
so k plus M goes n is capable samples n and the
same holds with intersections and unions now we
also have some distributive laws now we don't have
multiplication here of course the natural numbers
do have a multiplication but for the purposes
of this discussion we're ignoring multiplication
completely we're just focusing on addition Union
in an intersection and we're going to see that
there are distributive laws but they're quite
different fundamentally from the usual ones that
connect addition and multiplication k plus M Union
n is k plus M Union k plus N and here's the same
law just with the Union replaced with intersection
k plus M intersect n is k plus M intersect k
plus N and over here we have the similar kind of
relation but with the addition on the right hand
side so K Union M plus n equals k plus n Union M
plus N and same with intersections k intersect M
plus n equals k plus and intersect M plus M and
here our distributive laws that hold only four
intersections and unions and these are familiar
to people who had some experience with sets that K
Union M intersect n is K Union M intersect K Union
and and conversely we interchange the unions
and intersections so we have one intersection
now and one union then k intersect M Union n is K
intersect M Union k intersect n here's basically
the same law what with the single fellow on the
right-hand side so in all of these distributive
laws the same kind of thing happens that the two
elements in the bracket whatever their operation
is that the operation that ends up separating
the other side into two pieces so here there's
an intersection here there's an intersection here
is a union union here over here there's a union
and Union and intersection intersection we're
going to refer to all of these as distributive
laws but these are very familiar ones and these
ones are well they're just a little bit less
familiar so the natural numbers have a special
element the first one which is zero and it has
a sort of a special role with regard to each of
these operations we'll call these identity laws
the one for addition is that 0 plus 7 is the same
as n plus 0 which is M for unions 0 Union M the
maximum of 0 and M is going to be M so we're only
talking about natural numbers 0 1 2 3 4 and so on
well the minimum of 0 and M in either order is 0
we have to item potent laws that M Union M is M
and M intersect M is M we have some absorption
laws that M Union M intersect n is M that M
intersect and the Union n is also animal we have a
cancellation law that if we have K plus N equals m
plus n then K equals M you can sort of cancel the
end from both sides you might like to check that
there's no such cancellation law for the Union and
intersection operations and we have a summation
law that connects all three operations that am a
union n plus m intersect n equals m plus n a very
pleasent law this is just a term that I've made up
I'm not sure if there's some standard terminology
for this particular relation so in absence of
anything else let's call it summation law okay
so what about proofs of these various properties
well for that we can use the fact that our natural
numbers have a natural ordering the natural
numbers have an ordering 0 first then 1 then 2
and so on so given any two natural numbers we can
decide which one is bigger and that's of course
intimately connected with the operations of Union
and intersection because we're just taking the max
or the min so in order to evaluate say a relation
like this and see whether it's actually true for
all K and N which is what we're asserting what we
could do is we could go through all the various
possibilities of the possible relations the order
relations between three elements K m and n so if
we choose three natural numbers they can be in one
of six possible orders with respect to each other
for example they could be in the order K less than
or equal to M less than or equal to N and here are
the other possible orders and for each one of
these we could then figure out well what these
various left and right hand sides simplify to so
for example suppose that K is less than or equal
to M less than or equal to n in that case the left
hand side of this tapeless M Union n will be well
the M Union end that's the max so if M is less
than or equal to end then the max of this will
be n and so this expression will be K + n on the
other hand over here we have K + M Union k plus n
the max of K plus M and K + n well if n is bigger
than or equal to M then the K + n will be bigger
than or equal to K plus M and so this will be
the max so the right hand side is K + n and in
this case we see that the left hand side equals
the right hand side and so we can systematically
go through the other possibilities and I'll
let you check that these work okay so this is
a strategy for going through all these various
laws and well some of them are kind of obvious
but others need to be checked and this is one way
of checking them so please do that so have a look
at the laws which you're in perhaps not familiar
with or maybe unsure about how you'd prove that
and see if you can convince yourself that these
are automatically true no matter what the order
of km and that power there's another type of law
called an order law so usually with our arithmetic
with addition and multiplication the order of
the natural numbers is not directly connected
with the addition and multiplication but with
these Max and min otherwise known as Union and
intersection the order of course is intimately
connected with the operations so this allows us
to connect the order property with the arithmetic
structure given by these operations so in other
words we notice that M is less than or equal to
n precisely when M Union N equals n that's what
it means for M Union n to equal n it means that
max of these two is n that simply is telling us
that n is bigger than or equal to M and exactly
equivalently the same fact is expressed by the
relation with the intersection that M intersect
n is M that's also expressing the fact that M is
the smaller of the two m is less than or equal to
n so then with order we have a transitive property
that if K is less than or equal to M and M is
less than or equal to n then K is less than or
equal to n and so we can restate that property in
terms of our operations namely we can state that
if K Union M equals m and M Union N equals n then
K Union N equals n so given this up here we can
just reformulate this in terms of an implication
with Union and I'll leave it to you to write down
the same thing where we re express this with it
sections instead so this realm of natural numbers
that we have with addition Union and intersection
it's kind of interesting framework somewhat novel
it turns out to be very closely connected to
something called the tropical calculus or often
called the Max Plus algebra for obvious reasons
and we'll talk about the connections between what
we're doing here and that soon that will become
more apparent in our next video when we apply
this kind of business to understanding multisets
but even at the level of natural numbers there's
sort of interesting questions here there's no
doubt some more investigation that can be done
in terms of the deeper relations that are going
on here and so one natural question is are these
various laws independent or do some of them follow
from the others so I've just listed some laws that
each one of them could be checked individually
but it might be the case that some of the laws
are just consequences of others so in such a
situation it's nice to kind of identify what
are the minimal kind of laws that we need in order
to derive the others so thinking of an abstract
algebraic framework we're not necessarily so much
focusing on the objects that we're interested in
but more on the operations another thing we could
ask of course is that are there additional laws
valid for the natural numbers plus with these
operations that are not a consequence of these
so are there's some other laws that we can write
down that really do capture additional information
that so far we don't have I'm not sure about that
so it's a kind of question and let's refer to the
set up as a realm so the natural numbers plus
together with these three operations addition
Union intersection ignoring multiplication
ignoring all these other operations for now
we'll call that rallo okay and the crucial thing
is that the operations satisfy these various laws
that we've listed quite a few of them okay so
let's talk a little bit about subtraction which
is an inverse operation to addition if three plus
four equals seven then three equals seven minus
four so from the addition we can write down a
subtraction but in general subtraction is not
well defined in the natural numbers plus we take
three minus seven well that doesn't work in the
natural numbers so the subtraction is not really
a well-defined operation for all pairs of natural
numbers nevertheless this particular combination
is well defined what is this this is M minus M
intersect M so M intersect and that's the smaller
of M and n you have two numbers m and n if we take
M minus n that might be outside of the natural
numbers because n is bigger than n then we get
outside of the natural numbers but if we take
the minimum of M and n then this is actually
always going to be another natural number so
it's a kind of a partial subtraction so more
precisely AB minus M intersect n well there's two
cases if M is bigger than or equal to n then this
minimum is n and the difference is M minus n
which is actually a natural number assuming
that M is bigger than or equal to n the natural
number plus on the other hand if M is actually
less than n the other case then this minimum is
M and so M minus M intersect n is zero okay so we
can make a kind of an odd definition here we could
define a new kind of subtraction kind of a partial
subtraction let's call it circle subtraction
so M circle subtract n is by definition this
quantity M minus em intersect n so here's the
usual subtraction between natural numbers but
this particular combination ensures that this is
actually also always in the natural numbers that
natural numbers plus so eight circles subtract
five is three when you get since eight is bigger
than or equal to three on the other hand seven
circles subtract 11 is a zero ordinarily you get
a negative number but somehow the expression
sort of bumps that up to zero so this circle
subtraction is a new kind of operation it's that
kind of a replacement for subtraction perhaps in
this context of having natural numbers together
with being able to take a minimum so but here's an
example of a fact which could be stated in terms
of this new kind of circle subtraction and it's
an example of the idea that maybe this business
is a little bit more subtle that it might appear
at first glance alright so this is the theorem
that K plus M intersect N equals K intersect n
plus M intersect n circle subtract K and it's a
kind of a distributive law so if this was a true
distributive law we would expect that this thing
here would be K intersect n plus M intersect Edna
that law in fact does not work we do not have a
distributive law where there's an intersection
here and in addition inside this is some kind
of replacement for that distributive law which
we don't actually have it is a valid law but the
adjustment is that we have to replace this n that
appears in this term with an N circle subtract K
let's have a look at a few examples so different
values of K m and N sort of going through some
different possible orders so three plus four
intersect five this left hand side it would be
according to the theorem three intersect five
plus four intersect five circles subtract three
so is this actually true well the left-hand side
here we have seven intersect five that's five just
the minimum three intersect five is three and what
about this here well five circle subtract three
is two and the minimum of four and two is two and
so yes in this case the left hand side equals
the right hand side how about three plus five
intersect eight well this happens to be exactly
equal to this sum okay so the minimum of these two
things is eight three intersect eight plus five
intersect 8 Circle subtract three that becomes
three intersect eight is three and here we have
five intersect five which is five it works and
I'll let you check that here's another kind of
situation one plus two intersect four and here's
three plus four intersect to so please check
that in fact the identity still works so it
appears that it looks like it's likely to be true
for general K M and an independent of their order
okay so what about a proof of this little theorem
here it is again well let's separate it into some
cases so let's consider first the case when K
plus M is less than or equal to n in that case
the identity let's call it star is well k plus
M here intersect n we're assuming this so the
minimum here is 2k plus M K intersect and what's
that going to be well if k plus M is less than or
equal to n it means that K is less than or equal
to n so the minimum here has got to be K and and
we have this part here and intersect and circle
subtract K so what do we know about n circle
subtract K well in this case n is bigger than or
equal to K so the end the circle subtract K will
be just n minus K and what about the minimum of M
and n minus K well if we take this expression and
put the K on the other side we see that M is less
than or equal to n minus K so the minimum of these
two things will be M showing that the left-hand
side does in fact equal the right-hand side in
this case all right secondly suppose that K plus
M is bigger than n that's the other case we have
to separate that up into two separate or some
cases so let's have a look at the relationship
between K and n this actually doesn't tell us
whether K and n are bigger or less than or equal
to each other so we have to separate into two
cases suppose that K is actually bigger than or
equal to n all right then what does this relation
become k plus M intersect n we're assuming k plus
n is bigger than n so the minimum here is N and
K intersect n we're assuming K is bigger than or
equal to n so the minimum is n and what about this
well here we have M intersect and circle subtract
K if n is less than or equal to K and is less
than or equal to K if we take n and we subtract
K we would ordinarily get a negative number so if
we circle subtract we're gonna get 0 and so the M
then intersect zero is just going to be zero and
so this right-hand side reduces to n which is the
same as the left-hand side fortunately so that
case works out now the other case is that K is
actually less than n here so suppose that's the
case in that case our relationship is what well
we're still assuming K plus M is bigger than
n so this intersection is still now k is less
than n so this K intersect n will be K and here we
have again just copying at M intersect and circle
subtract K ok now in this case I should put a
brackets here in this case the end circle subtract
K will be n minus K because we're assuming n
is bigger than K okay so that circle subtract
will just be ad minus K and what is the minimum
of M and n minus K well we're working under the
assumption that K plus M is less than n so if we
take this and we bring the K to the other side we
see that M is bigger than n minus K and so the
minimum of M and n minus K will be the N minus
K and so overall the right hand side simplifies
to n which is the same as the left hand side so
those are all the possibilities in each case
the identity is satisfied so it's say correct
theorem you might like to think about whether
there's a corresponding kind of result where we
replace the intersection with the Union and more
generally natural to ask well are there any other
interesting so my daddy's that are floating around
here in this realm of natural numbers with these
three operations maybe there are you know huge
identities which are far from being trivial that
very well might be the case so in our next video
having armed ourselves with a sort of preparatory
discussion of the natural numbers we're going to
move to our main interest which is talking about
multi sets and sort of putting the algebra of
multi sets onto a firm basis we're going to do
that by applying very directly what we've done
here in today's video so to create the realm
of multi sets but not in great generality we're
still going to be focusing on multi sets come from
natural number n so that we're still restricting
our attention to very specific finite concrete
numbers of elements so I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening